###### Zoe Metzger

###### Tyler Frazier

###### Evolving Solutions

###### Presenting April 27, 2020

# Climate Change in Nicaragua: The Effects on Neonatal Health and Survival

​	Climate change having extreme impacts on the Nicaraguan people. Nicaragua is experiencing both high temperatures and droughts, but also flooding. Another issue in Nicaragua is around neonatal health. The negative effects of a changing environment could potentially have a negative impact on pregnant women and their children. How exactly is climate change impacting the future generation of Nicaragua? Nicaragua has issues with governmental corruption, health care, and economic equality. What can be done at an administrative level for pregnant women and their children experiencing issues as a result of climate change? The investigation into climate change and its impacts on neonatal health and survival has not been thoroughly explored. To analyze the survey data on climate change I can use the SPSS software package. The SPSS software package can perform statistical functions, enables building and validating models, and data visualization. The Cox model can be helpful to my research because it is a regression model that measures the risk of failure. It is commonly used in the medical field to measure survival. In my case failure would be the death or serious illness of a fetus, pregnant mother, or child under the age of five. By using the Cox regression model and SPSS software, I will be able to analyze the correlation between the climate change and childbirth and health. The impact of climate change has been investigated in the north-west region. By focusing the support on local ownership, political reconciliation, consensus decision-making, social and gender equity, an environmental and public health perspective, and sustainability, Blandon, Kallestal, Pena, Perez, Berglund, Contreras, and Persson were able to see a positive shift in poverty and health. “During the last decade, the proportion of individuals living in poverty was reduced from 79 to 47%. Primary school enrolment increased from 70 to 98% after the start of the school breakfast program. Under-five mortality was around 50 per 1,000 live births in 1990 and again peaked after Hurricane Mitch and was approaching 20 per 1,000 in 2014.” By conducting this research, there is a hope that there can be changes that help support the Nicaraguan people. Instead of only focusing on what to do after there are complications with pregnancies and young children, this information could help prevent or look for ways to mitigate these challenges. The goal is, similarly to what happened in north-western Nicaragua, people understand that the changes need to be made at the national level in order to protect the future generations of Nicaragua. Instead of only focusing on what to do after there are complications with pregnancies and young children, this information could help prevent or look for ways to mitigate the challenges surrounding neonatal health and survival.