​	By the late 70's people realized the models were not working.  People began to place the blame on bad government policies interfering with the proper functioning of markets. World Bank and IMF proposed a series of policy reforms known as the Washington Consensus. Barder explained how some people saw the Washington consensus as a failure. Freeing up markets still did not allow low-income countries to step up into the industrialized world. Barder also explains how some of the reforms were actually beneficial in some areas. Sub Saharan Africa saw economic improvement after bringing down public deficits and liberalizing exchange rates. In the 1990's it was determined the Washington Census was not working. So it was decided to switch to a focus on institutions not policy. This too was a failure because we do not know which institutions to support that are most important for low-income countries. In conclusion, Bader illustrates our lack of knowledge about how to boost economic growth. Looking for the missing ingredient has not been successful. "Every time we think we have identified what’s missing, we find that it is not something which can be provided from outside, but it turns out to be an endogenous characteristic of the system itself."



​	The Harrod-Domar growth model claims output increases as capital and labor increase. The two fundamental variables are capital and labor. If they cannot increase, then there cannot be growth. This model was proven by developing countries lack of surplus labor. Meaning capital was constraining them. Walter Rostow wrote the book "The Stages of Economic Growth". He claimed development is a virtuous circle: when investment rises, that means that the capital stock rises, so output rises, leading to higher incomes, more savings, and so more investment. He had a big impact on the idea of foreign aid. "Once you know the investment you need to get lift off, you can calculate the amount of foreign aid that is needed to fill the gap between domestic savings and the level of investment you need."



