# Methodological Investigation 

​	With climate change being a critical and concerning topic today, how will climate change affect future generations? More specifically how would this affect a developing country such as Nicaragua? I propose to conduct an investigative analysis of how climate change has negatively impacted Nicaragua. This research proposes to investigate the correlation between climate change factors and neonatal outcomes/child births. Identifying correlations between these predictive and response oriented factors will serve to illustrate how our actions today are directly impacting children at the moment they enter this world. What needs to be done to protect future generations? How could environmental sustainability have a long-term positive impact and how could it support short-term medical support?

​	There are a lot of geospatial and DHS (Demographic and Health Surveys) data sources describing Nicaragua. Geospatial data will include a number of raster and vector datasets including administrative boundaries, infrastructure, and environmental variables. DHS produces household surveys that describe health, demographic and economic dimensions of human development. In order to understand Nicaragua as a whole, the geospatial and survey data can be analyzed with random foresting in order to produce a high resolution spatial description of Nicaragua’s population and demographic characteristics. To illustrate climate change, biodiversity data and a data package with climate change indicators can be analyzed with the World Climate Analysis tool. The World Climate Analysis tool uses satellite data from the University of Delaware’s Global Climate Research Page’s. The data is then calculated under a linear model. Finally, to illustrate the population data packages with childbirths, pregnancies, and deaths of children under the age of five I can use the Cox multivariable model. The Cox proportional hazard model is a regression model that measures the risk of failure. It is commonly used in the medical field to measure survival. Then I can produced a multivariate model by combining all of these variables. I am going to focus on the Cox model because I believe it will best illustrate neonatal health and survival. 

​	My research is an evaluative inquiry. I am looking at how the influence of climate change factors are impacting the health and survival of pregnancies, pregnant women, and children under the age of five. My research began with the combination of various other questions. This process supports an evaluative inquiry because it is the connection between different research questions. I was thinking about how climate change will directly affect the future generations. Climate change itself can be considered a evaluative inquiry because it is evaluating how different measurements of the natural world are changing in relation to the variables of human pollution. I then moved on to thinking about how climate change would affect a developing country such as Nicaragua. This is understanding how the factors of climate change are impacted by the political and social world of Nicaragua. Finally, I had to decide what factor would represent what determines the future. What is the survival and health of fetus', pregnant women, and children under the age of five? By combining these questions I came up with "How is climate change impacting the Neonatal health in Nicaragua?" 

### Cox Model
​	The two data science methods that jumped out the most to me was the Cox model and SPSS. The Cox model was used by Lion, Prata, and Stewart in their research *Adolescent Childbearing in Nicaragua: A Quantitative Assessment of Associated Factors* [1]. Much of the data came from 2001 Nicaragua Demographic and Health Survey (DHS). They received survey data from 13,060 women aged 15–49 in randomly selected households. They used data from 45 minute interviews of 3,142 females aged 15–19 who answered questions about their sexual activity. Data were analyzed with Intercooled STATA 8.0, using the appropriate DHS-assigned survey weighting. They performed the Cox proportional hazard modeling with residence, education, and wealth quintile in a bivariate model. The Cox proportional hazard model is a regression model that measures the risk of failure. It is commonly used in the medical field to measure survival. They produced a multivariate model by combining all of these variables. Finally, Bivariate testing was used to select the most important variables. 

​	The Cox multivariate model and the Bivariate model both illustrated that those who live in rural areas or in poverty were at a higher risk of a young pregnancy. The research does not discuss this, but those in the rural regions are most impacted by climate change. So, if there are more young mothers in a region with uncertain climate, then the mothers, fetus, and children are at a higher risk for health issues. While the lack of education and financial support is the cause for young pregnancies and some complications, the extreme effects of climate change could heighten the risk for mothers, fetus’, and children.

​	The Cox model can be helpful to my research because it is used to show failure vs success. In my case failure would be the death or serious illness of a fetus, pregnant mother, or child under the age of five. I could then use this very explicate model to illustrate which areas are failing with neonatal health and survival. Which I could then compare to the areas most impacted by climate change.

### SPSS Software
​	The SPSS software package was used by Radel, Schmook, Carte, and Mardero in their research *Toward a Political Ecology of Migration: Land, Labor Migration, and Climate Change in Northwestern Nicaragua*[2]. The data used to come to illustrate the impacts of climate change in Northwestern Nicaragua mostly came from face-to-face interview surveys. These surveys were conducted by the research team to learn about labor migration and the reasoning behind it. The recordings from the qualitative surveys and workshops, which were iteratively coded for specific topics, alongside of the quantitative themes to draw conclusions. They used SPSS, a software package that uses machine learning for statistical analysis in social science, to analyze the quantitative data. Survey data can be very valuable to research. This data can represent a more personal take on findings. People who tend to be left out by larger data sets can have their voice heard. This makes survey data very important when analyzing low and middle income countries, such as Nicaragua. To illustrate temperature and rainfall change they looked at data from the Nicaraguan Institute of Territorial Studies. Climate change was also illustrated by the use of an online analysis tool, World Climate Analysis. The World Climate Analysis tool uses satellite data from the University of Delaware's Global Climate Research Page's. 

​	By combining the results of the survey data and the satellite data, Radel and her team could “illustrate the reality of unpredictable, variable rains, as well as a growing concern over the increase in drought conditions…” The group concluded that their findings illustrate a negative impact on the livelihood of those who rely on local agriculture.

​	The SPSS software package can perform statistical functions, enables building and validating models, and data visualization. But, most importantly, SPSS has a text analysis feature that can be used to analyze results rom open ended survey questions. A lot of the data surrounding climate  change and neonatal health and survival comes as either DHS data or individually done surveys. This will be helpful for when I analyze the climate change factors and how they are most impacting the different regions of Nicaragua.

​	Based on the gap in research about the correlation between climate change and neonatal health and survival, I want to aggregate and join geospatial and DHS (Demographic and Health Surveys) data sources, each source describing Nicaragua in terms of climate change and childbirth. By using the Cox regression model and SPSS software, I will be able to analyze the correlation between the climate change and child birth and health.



###### 1. Lion, K. C., Prata, N., & Stewart, C. (2009). Adolescent Childbearing in Nicaragua: A Quantitative Assessment of Associated Factors. *International Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health*, 35(02), 091–096. doi: 10.1363/3509109

###### 2. Radel, C., Schmook, B., Carte, L., & Mardero, S. (2018). Toward a Political Ecology of Migration: Land, Labor Migration, and Climate Change in Northwestern Nicaragua. *World Development*, *108*, 263–273. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.04.023

